Should billionaires like Elon Musk be allowed to donate large sums to presidential campaigns?
Should wealthy donors have limits on how much they can contribute to political campaigns?
Should celebrities, like Taylor Swift or LeBron James, be vocal about their political endorsements?
Should candidates release both their tax returns and medical records before elections?
Do you believe candidates over 75 should undergo mental fitness evaluations?
Should personal medical histories of candidates be public information?
Do you believe Trump’s role in the January 6th Capitol riot disqualifies him from holding office?
Should a candidate who encouraged supporters to challenge election results be allowed to run again?
Does Trump’s refusal to concede the 2020 election make him unfit for future office?
Do you believe Trump’s management of the COVID-19 pandemic was effective?
Should a candidate’s handling of a national crisis like COVID-19 affect their eligibility?
Do you think Trump’s approach to COVID-19 protected public health ?
Do you agree with Trump’s travel ban on certain Muslim-majority countries?
Should religious or ethnic groups be considered in shaping immigration policies?
Was Trump’s stance on immigration too restrictive ?
Should age be a factor in determining a candidate's eligibility?
Do you think mental fitness tests should be required for candidates over 75?
Should Biden have stepped down due to concerns about his age and health?
Should security at campaign events be heightened in light of recent threats?
Do assassination attempts or threats impact your view of a candidate’s resilience?
Should candidates focus on reducing political violence and division?
Should a president be required to concede if they lose an election?
Does refusing to concede an election affect the integrity of the democratic process?
Should a president work with the opposition to bridge national divides?
Should the U.S. impose tariffs on countries like China to protect American jobs?
Do you believe tariffs on imported goods help or hurt the economy?
Do you believe the excessive tariffs proposed by Trump would be effective ?
Should American companies be penalized for outsourcing jobs overseas?
Should the government impose stricter regulations to combat climate change?
Do you think climate change should be a top priority for presidential candidates?
Should the U.S. rejoin international agreements to reduce carbon emissions?
Was the Supreme Court right to grant Trump partial immunity for actions as president?
Should candidates with active criminal cases be allowed to run?
Does the Supreme Court have too much influence on political outcomes?
Was Biden’s decision to step down the right choice?
Do you think Kamala Harris is a good replacement candidate for Biden?
Should a candidate’s choice of running mate affect your vote?
Should personal scandals, like Trump’s hush-money payments, impact a candidate’s eligibility?
Do you think that moral character should be a significant factor in candidate selection?
Should a candidate’s commitment to honesty be as important as their policies?
